# HARDWARE

OS: Manage HWs, its resources and public SWs.

Firmware: Softwares that exist beween SWs and HWs. Like a SW for keyboard.

- BIOS: Firmware of old Motherboards.
- UEFI: Unified Extensible Firmware Interface (from EFI). Has a separate partition (`/boot` on Linux). FAT standard.

We can add new devices to Motherboards by PCIs (Peripheral Component Interconnect). Like slot of RAM or GPU.

GPio: General Purpsoe imput output. Like RespberryPi

### How Linux communicates with these HWs?

These dirs are not really on disc. They're just sudos and just wanna say that how the kernel actually thinks about.

`sysfs`: peseudo file system. Looks inside of memory of the kernel. Looks information about HWs, FWs and other things.

```bash
ls /sys
```

if we need to work with our devices, we should go to `/dev` dir. It's kinda a device manager for Linux. Human readable. We can manualy write to or read from devcies inside `/dev`

```bash
ls /dev

head /dev/random # returns random chars uniquely!
```

- stdin: standard input: your default keyboard!
- stdout: standard output: your default monitor!

`/dbus` is a mechanism for devices or firmwares to talk together.

`/proc`. It show IRQs (intrrupt requests), I/O ports, DMA (Direct Memory Accesses), network settings, ...

```bash
ls /proc # you can see all processes that is running.

ls /proc/sys/net/ipv4 # all settings of ipv4. we can change them!
```

### ls-like commands for working with HWs

```bash
lsusb # ls from use devices
lspci
lsblk # ls from things like discs
lshw
```

Kernel Modules (KO files): At many times, drivers are part of Kernel on Linux and we don't need to install anything. These modules are aside of Kernel and we can load or delete them. The related commands:

```bash
lsmod # shows loaded modules
modprobe # for loading a module
rmmod <modulename> # remove a module
insmod <modulename> # insert a module
```

Example with "tls" module:

```bash
lsmod
modprobe tls
rmmod tls
```
