# FHS (File Heirarchy System)

`/` --> root

`/home` --> users' home.

`/bin` --> popular executable files of system (file of some commands like bash, mkdir, ...).

`/boot` --> files that boots the system like: Grub, Kernel, EFI (for UEFI boots), ... .

`/dev` --> all devices that we can access to them.

`/etc` --> setting of all apps.

`/lib` --> shared libraries, Kernel modules, ...

`/mnt` --> for custom mounting things like network disk that we wand to read it temporarily.

`/media` --> for mount and unmounting the portable devices.

`/opt` --> usually we install elastic search in opt to be isolate from other parts of the system.

`/root` --> files of root user.

`/sbin` --> more important files of system.

`/tmp` --> for temporary tasks. these files can be deleted after rebooting system.

`/usr` --> a secondary heirarchy for some dir of the root. The idea comes from that when users start to install and change important things, it's not for the whole of the system, just for users to prevent conflicts and problem. Right now, in most systems, these secondary dirs are emerged with root dirs and for example there is no defference between `/sbin` and `/usr/sbin`. In fact `/sbin` is just a link to `/usr/sbin`.

`/var` --> variables. important file: `/var/log`

# Partitions

we create partitions to separate parts of OS.

Example: we create two partitions in our disk. The first part is for root and boot things and its capacity is about 50GB. The other partition will be dedicated for home dir with 950GB of capacity. In the end, we can change our OS without touching the partition related to home dir.

Exmaple of how partitions organized:

- `/dev/sda` --> first hard
  - `/dev/sda1` --> first partition of the first hard
  - `/dev/sda2` --> second partition of the first hard
- `/dev/sdb` --> second hard

we can see inside of sda with this:

```bash
fdisk /dev/sda # then type p for partitions

parted /dev/sda p # shows the partitions

gparted # graphical parted
```

# LVM (Logical Volume Manager)

to resize partitions. Like a virtual disk

The concepts inside LVM:

PV (Physical Volume): A drive or a partition. They are real and physical.
VG (Volume Group): one or more PVs.
LV (Logical Volume): LVs as partitions that OS knows.

# DESIGN HARD DISK

default partitions on Linux: one partition for "swap", one partition for `/boot` and rest of the space for the Linux.

swap: like extended memory. It'll use one part of disk as memory. Amount of swap is better to be "amount of your RAM capacity + 2GB" or "amount of your RAM capacity x2".

Note: When system is hibernated, it has written all of RAM inside of swap and goes down. After starting up, it reads all the data inside swap to RAM and loads previous state of the system.

A design for Network workstation computer with many users inside of it:

- 1st partition: `/boot` (1GB)
- 2nd partition: swap (2xRAM)
- 3rd partition: `/` (30GB) --> all apps and configs
- 4th partition: `/home` (rest) --> for all users

A desigin for Server computer:

- 1st partition: `/boot` (1GB)
- 2nd partition: swap (2xRAM)
- 3rd partition: `/` (30GB) --> all apps and configs
- 4th partition: `/var` (100GB) --> because of logs
- 5th partition: `/usr` --> for apps that users will install
- 6th partition: `/opt` --> independent apps like Elastic search
- 7th partition: `/home` (rest) --> for all users

RAID: for the sits that one of your HWs fails (burned for ex) and another HW should be used safely.
